blog: building a startup with rust (#173)
getsynth/synth: docs/blog/2021-09-28-building-a-startup-with-rust.md

server costs, ecosystem, tooling, support, licenses etc. You can assign weights
to what is most important for your business, but at the end of the day the
decision is inevitably qualitative.

At Synth, we're working on building the best data generator in the world. We
made a conscious decision to use Rust for our main line of products. After more
than a year of building I've had the opportunity to see Rust at its best and
worst in the context of starting a company - this post is a compilation of
these (at times cynical) thoughts.

## Development Velocity

Rust has a *really* steep learning curve. Coming from an OO background it took
me *months* to become productive in Rust. This was incredibly frustrating for me
as I felt that my lack of productivity was impacting the team, which it was.
Even when you eventually do become productive (and you will), Rust forces you to
really think deeply about what you're doing and things inevitably take longer to
get over the line. A poorly thought out design decision today can come back to
haunt you months later. What should be a simple change or refactor can end up
resulting in complete tear down as you try to appease the borrow checker. This

> is deadly.

Reviewer: On the other hand, refactors in Rust can often be pretty painless with a bit of planning, because one can change the types so the compiler will direct the following restructuring of operations.

I also don't feel that I need to appease borrowck that much, but that's perhaps my unconscious internal borrowck doing the work before I even start typing.

it's that same quality that makes a great engineer. It's also been a pleasant
surprise to find out that really good engineers will seek you out as an
employer *because you use Rust*. They don't want to work in *script or Java or
C++. They want to work with Rust because it's great.

## Open Source

At Synth, we've chosen to adopt an open-core business model. The idea behind an
open-core business is you develop and open source product with a permissive
license which solves a real *technical* problem. You work on building a user
base, a community and a great product all out in the open. You then structure
your business model around solving the corresponding *organisational* problem -
and that's how you make money.

We've been really lucky to have a really active set of contributors - giving
ideas, reporting bugs and contributing (at times very significant) code. It is
hard to know for sure, but we have a strong hunch that a lot of the contributors
are active because they have an interest in Rust projects specifically. A lot of
our contributors are also interested in learning Rust - not necessarily being
veterans of the language. This has worked out great as the more experienced

> members of our core team mentor and review code of young rustaceans, building a

Author: and review

symbiotic positive feedback loop.

Thank you to all our contributors - you know who you are and you guys are
amazing.

## Libraries

> Rust has an ecosystem of incredibly high quality libraries. The Rust core team

Author: incredibly twice

has led by example and focused on an incredibly high quality and tight standard
library. The result of a highly focused standard library is (unfortunately) a
lack of canonical libraries for doing things outside the standard library. So
you want a webserver, pick from one of the 100s available. You want a crate (
Rust lingo for library) for working with JWT tokens? Here's 9, pick one. I mean,
even something as fundamental as an asynchronous runtime is split
between `tokio`
and `async-std`. As a young Rustaecean this can be overwhelming.

What ends up happening over time is certain libraries become implicitly
canonical as they receive overwhelming support and start becoming serious

> dependecies differentiating from their alternatives. I predict this will get

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dependencies differentiating from their alternatives. I predict this will get
```

better as the ecosystem matures, but predictions are dangerous. // TODO: I think

> niko matsakis talked about them standardising this

Reviewer: Do you mean Niko's Rustconf talk? Then we best link to the video.

The lack of canonical non-standard libraries is an issue when you're getting
started - but over time this diminishes as you get a better understanding of the
ecosystem. What *has* been constantly detrimental to our development velocity

> has been the lack of *integration* libraries for Rust. We've had to write a

Reviewer: We should explain the term "integration library", as it may be unclear to some of our readers.

bunch of different integrations ourselves but they're often clunky as we don't
have the time to invest in making them really high quality. For example most of
Google's products have at best an unofficial crate maintained by the community,
and at worst absolutely nothing. You need to write it from scratch.

## Should you build your startup with Rust?

Well it depends. Assuming you're building a product in the right domain for
Rust (say a CLI as opposed to a social media site), even then the answer is not
clear cut. If you don't have close to 100% conviction that you know what you're
building, I would be inclined to say no. Development velocity and being able to
make rapid iterations is so important for an early stage startup that it
outweighs a lot of the benefits that Rust brings to the table.

If your company is later stage and you know understand exactly what you should

> be building (assuming this is every the case) then I would say yes. The '
> correctness' of Rust programs and the propensity of Rust to attract great

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be building (assuming this is every the case) then I would say yes. The
'correctness' of Rust programs and the propensity of Rust to attract great
```
